=head1 NAME

jQueryMigrationGuide - How to migrate your code to use jQuery.

=head1 Migrate your jifty app to jquery

Application developers may start the migration by modifying
F<config.yml>, setting the C<ConfigFileVersion> to 4. If you did not write
any custom javascript code for your app, then you're done. Everything
should just work.

If you did write some javascript code, but you did not use any
of the functions defined in F<jifty*.js>, F<prototype.js> or
F<scriptaculous.js>, then you're still good to go.

Otherwise, your code might need to be modified a little bit. Since
both F<prototype.js> and F<scriptaculous.js> are removed by default,
one trivial choice is to simply bring them back. That is as easy as
adding the B<Prototypism> plugin to your Jifty application.

If you dislike Prototypism like we do, you can choose to
re-write your code with jQuery. In the section L</"From Prototype
to jQuery"> below, we provide some common patterns that can be applied to
rewrite Prototypism code with jQuery, or with just normal javascript.

If you hack on Jifty's internals, please make sure you've read the following
L</"Jifty API"> section and L<Jifty::Manual::JavaScript> to catch the
Javascript API updates since the removal of C<prototype.js>.

Although we've removed C<prototype.js>, we still prefer to use
the non-conflict mode of jQuery. That is, C<$> function is
now undefined instead of an alias to jQuery. This is to ensure that it's
not conflicting with Prototypism anywhere. If you'd like
to use C<$> function, create that alias in your C<app.js> like this:

    $ = jQuery;

However, instead of making a global alias, it's always recommended to
localize this alias within a closure:

    (function($) {
        // $ is an alias to jQuery only inside this closure

        $(".message").show();
    })(jQuery);

=head1 Jifty API

We re-architechted Jifty's javascript libraries to use jQuery. Especially
the internal functions to process form elements.

The old, Prototype-based way is to extend Form object and the
Form.Element object. Since the removal of the Prototype library, it is
dangerous to name those functions under Form because loading
the Prototype library can destroy those Jifty functions.

The new jQuery-based way is to always extend internal functions
under the Jifty object. C<Form> becomes C<Jifty.Form>, C<Form.Element> becomes
C<Jifty.Form.Element>, and so on. The detailed list of these
functions are given in L<Jifty::Manual::Javascript>. Most of
those functions are internal functions that you probably should not
use directly.

=head1 From Prototype to jQuery

If you've ever written javascript code for your Jifty applications, and
you'd like to remove the PrototypeJS library, here are some mechanical rules to
re-write prototypejs-based javascript code with jQuery.

=head3 Array iteration

From:

    A.each( function( $_ ) { ... } )

To:

    jQuery.each(A, function(index, value ) {
        // "this" is an alias to current value.
    })

=head2 Hash key iteration

From:

    H = new Hash({...});

    H.each(function( pair ) {
        // pair.key is the key
        // pair.value is the value
    });

jQuery.each is designed to work on both C<Array> and C<Object> in the
same way. So there's not much difference.

To:

    // H can be any kind of "Object"

    jQuery.each(H, function(key, value) {
        // "this" is an alias to current value.
    })

=head2 Object extend

From:

    obj.extend({ ... }}

To:

    jQuery.extend( obj, { ... } )

=head2 JSON

jQuery does not ship with the JSON stringify function, but since it
neither altered the native Array, nor defined its own Hash, it's
acceptable and preferred to just use C<JSON.stringify> from C<json.js>.

From:

    // obj need to be one of those objects defined in C<prototype.js>
    obj.toJSON();

To:

    JSON.stringify( obj )

=head2 Effects

jQuery has a small set of default effects built into its core. They
have different names then those defined in C<scriptaculous.js>. The
internal way to specify effects is using the C<Jifty.Effect> method. Please
see the detailed usage documentation in L<Jifty::Manual::JavaScript>.

=cut
