=head1 NAME

Jifty::Manual::Preload - One Path to a Snappy UI

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Preloading lets you optimistically load regions before they are to be
displayed. This improves user experience because preloaded updates are
effectively instant; the user does not wait for an HTTP request/response cycle.
The request/response cycle still happens, but it happens behind the scenes
while the user is filling out the form or reading the current page.

=head1 WARNING

Preloading is applicable only if your use case fulfills a specific set of
constraints.

The region you are preloading must I<not> depend greatly on the actions
submitted by the current page. For example, you cannot sanely preload a region
which includes the content of a textarea that the user is typing in the current
page.

On the other hand, the click of a button may be preloadable depending on what
the button does. We use a nice tactic in Changelogger
(L<http://changelogger.bestpractical.com>) to preload vote buttons. We need to
know which change to display to the user next, which is a nontrivial amount of
database work. When rendering a button, we begin a transaction, submit a fake
vote action, choose the next change, then rollback the transaction. This turns
out to be a fairly simple way to figure out what to display next for
preloading.

A region that is preloaded should not cause gratuitous side effects. It should
never construct and submit actions on its own, mutate records, or anything else
of that sort. Basically, the region should expect to be generated
unconditionally. It can of course display a form, since that itself does not
have side effects. It can also cause side effects that are rolled back, such as
the example in the previous paragraph.

Preloading should also be agnostic of real-world time. If you preload a region
that contains a timestamp, then that timestamp may be stale by the time the
region is actually shown. Similarly for displaying duration. For example, at
the end of Hiveminder's task review, we tell you exactly how long you spent in
the review. This final report update cannot be preloaded because the user may
spend ten minutes on the last task.

Preloading can cause additional server load. Instead of a single request
containing action submission and region updates, preloading sends a request
containing action submission, then a request for each region update handler.
The overhead of each request is probably nontrivial. However, the cost of
preloading is probably worth it to improve user experience.

Finally, preloading is pretty new. It has not been battle tested. There may be
serious race conditions that result in inconsistencies that confound your
users. There may be data loss. It may interact strangely with other Jifty
features. These things would be very difficult to debug.

Good luck!

=head1 USAGE

To mark a form element as preloadable, use the C<< preload => 'cache_key' >>
option:

    form_submit(
        onclick => {
            submit       => $vote,
            preload      => 'vote',
            refresh_self => 1,
            arguments    => {
                change => $next_change->id,
            },
        },
    );

This marks the onclick handler as preloadable. When this button is I<rendered>,
the user's web browser will request this region immediately. When this button
is button is I<clicked>, the user's web browser will instantly refresh the
region without having to send an AJAX request and wait for the response.

The value of C<preload> is a cache key. This lets you reuse the same cache for
preloaded regions. For example, if you're going to display ten vote buttons,
then ordinarily you would make ten preload requests. However, if you give all
of the buttons the C<vote> cache key, only one preload request will be made.
Obviously this means that the specific button being clicked should not matter.
If you have a "undo vote" button which sends you backwards, you would not want
to preload that with the same cache key as regular votes, since a different
form would be displayed. In fact, you probably do not want to preload it al,
since it's presumably a rare occurrence.

You may also pass a value of C<1> for the C<preload> key. This tells Jifty to
generate a unique key for this preload so that you don't have to.

Note that the C<$vote> action is submitted well after the next region has been
preloaded!

=head1 GORY DETAILS

=head2 Basis

Preloading hijacks Jifty's ordinary AJAX update mechanism. When a preloadable
element is rendered, we include a bit of additional javascript which
immediately calls C<Jifty.preload>. Thus the preload request is initiated
around the time the page is rendered. Since the request is nonblocking, it
should not noticeably affect the user experience.

When the user agent receives the response to the preload request, it is cached.
Finally, when the user activates the handler that was preloaded, we run the
cached response through the C<onSuccess> update routine. This ends up being
very fast since the user does not have to wait for request and response
overhead, or the server processing time.

This is a slight simplification. In reality, a few forces make this process
more complicated.

=head2 Many requests for a preload key

Suppose your form has many buttons which perform the same kind of region
update. They all replace this vote form with the next vote form. It does not
matter which specific button the user clicks, they're all going to preload the
same vote form. Thus, it is desirable to make only one preload request for all
of these buttons, instead of one preload request for each button.

When we initiate a preload request, we check to see if there is already a
pending preload request for the given preload cache key. If so, we bail out.
This way, only one request is made.

In the future, we may also bail out if a response exists for the preload key in
the cache. We do not do this yet because of cache staleness concerns.

=head2 Activating handler before its request cycle finishes

If a user is quick, they may click a preloadable button during, or even before,
that region's preload request/response cycle finishes. The simple way to handle
this would be to ignore that the handler has preloading and just continue with
the usual update cycle, sending a fresh HTTP hit.

We can do better though. Since we may have already sent the preload request, we
instead of just wait for its response instead of initiating a new request. We
then mark that preload key as "wanted". This means that upon response, it will
be immediately processed instead of waiting for its handler to be activated.

=head2 Actions

Actions complicate the whole workflow. Ordinarily, we strip out action
submission from region preload requests, since preloaded regions are supposed
to be side-effect free. Rendering the button does I<not> imply that the button
will always be clicked, so preloading the onclick's region does not submit the
action. Instead, the action is submitted when the onclick handler is activated
by the user.

Given a page that has a button which preloads a refresh_self region update and
submits an action, the following sequence of events happens.

=over 4

=item The page is loaded

This renders a button which fires off...

=item The refresh_self preload request cycle occurs

This puts the unprocessed region into a cache for later use.

=item Time passes

=item The user clicks the button

Now a number of things occur pretty quickly.

=item A nonblocking AJAX request for the action submission occurs

This takes no noticeable time so the later region replacement still feels
instantaneous.

=item Preloading is temporarily halted

=item The region replacement occurs

Ordinarily, this would render the button again, which includes some javascript
to preload the next replace_self. However, preload submission is blocked until
the action's response arrives. This is to make sure the action has been run
before the next region is rendered, otherwise things could get too
inconsistent. We block preloading because the action submission request and the
preload request are not guaranteed to happen in order since they are separate
connections. They could be routed differently.

In the future, we may do something similar to Nagle's algorithm where all such
pieces end up in the same request.

While preloading is blocked, all preload requests go into a queue. When
preloading becomes unblocked, all of the delayed preload requests will be
executed.

=item The action response arrives

=item We display the action results

This could take the form of jGrowl updates or what have you, so the user still
receives feedback about the actions they submitted.

=item Preloading is unblocked

=item Delayed preload requests are executed

=back

=cut

